So, we have seen that graphs are very useful
mathematical structures for modeling problems.
But, when we write an algorithm to solve a
graph theoretic problem, we need a way to
represent and manipulate the graph in our
algorithm. So, we will look at that in this
lecture.
So, recall that a graph is a set of vertices
or nodes V connected by a set of edges E.
We can have two types of edges, undirected
edges and directed edges. An undirected edge
is drawn as just a line between two vertices
and it represents the fact that v and v prime
are connected. It does not matter whether
we call this edge v comma v prime or v prime
comma v, there is only one edge.
On the other hand in a directed graph, we
actually associated a direction with an edge.
So, we could draw an edge from v to v prime
and this we would write in our edge set as
a pair v comma v primes saying that the start
vertex is v and the end of the edge is v prime.
And this is not the same as having an edge
from v prime to v which will be written as
v prime comma v.
So, in directed graphs the order of the vertices
when you mention the edge matters, then the
undirected graph is just a pair of vertices,
it does not matter whether we think of it
as v to v prime or v prime to v, it is just
a connection between these two pairs of vertices.
So, we saw two typical problems involving
finding a route, which can be represented
for both undirected and directed graphs. So,
in a directed graph, we were looking for path
from v 0 to v 5, such that each pair v 0,
v 1; v 1, v2 etcetera, these are directed
edges in our graph.
At the same time, we can make the same graph
undirected and again we are looking for a
path, where we start at v 0 and every adjacent
pair v 0 to v 1, v 1 to v 2 is an edge, such
that we finally end up in the target vertex
v 5.
So, the problem that we have abstractly, let
us stick to undirected graphs, is that we
are given at this point an undirected graph
and we are given a source vertex v s and a
target vertex v t and we asked, whether there
is a way to go from v s to v t in this graph.
Now, what we did in the previous graph and
what we can do as a human beings is to take
a look at the graph and see, if we can visually
identify such a path, just see v s and v t
are connected.
But, when we write an algorithm to manipulate
a graph, how do we get the algorithm to look
at the picture. So, for us a graph is a picture
and we can easily look at the picture, if
the graph is not very complicated and try
to understand the situation. But, how do we
make this picture available to an algorithm?
We need a way to represent this picture that
gives the graph as input to our algorithm.
So, let us make some assumptions, in any graph
that we consider, there will only be a finite
set of vertices. So, if there are n vertices
to simplify life, let us just name these vertices
1, 2 up to n. So, our vertices are always
going to be 1, 2, 3, 4 up to n. So, therefore
now an edge is a pair of numbers i comma j.
So, the first representation we can have is
to just record which pairs i and j are connected.
So, this is called an adjacency matrix, we
say in this matrix A i j is 1, if and only
if i j is an edge.
So, when we write such a matrix, then if we
take a graph like we had before, we would
now rename the vertices 1 to 3 up to 10, because
there are actually 10 vertices in this graph
and then we would write this matrix which
says for instant there is an edge from 1 to
3 and therefore, the entry A 1 3 is 1. There
is no edge from 1 to 5 and therefore, the
entry A 1 5 is 0.
So, in this way for every edge that we find
in the graphs, say for example, A 4 5, we
will find an entry in the graph which says
A 4 5 is 1. Now, remember that this is undirected.
So, if there is an edge 4 5, there is also
an edge 5 4 and so we will see that actually
there is a matching edge 5 4. So, this graph
is actually, this matrix will actually be
symmetric across this diagonal. So, if I see
a 1 above the line, I will see a 1 below the
line, because 8 9 is as same as 9 8 as far
as our undirected edges hold. So, this is
an adjacency matrix.
So, now what can we do with the adjacency
matrix? Well, one thing we can do for example
is find all the neighbors of a vertex. Suppose,
if we want the neighbors of a vertex i, then
we want to look at the row i and look at all
the entries 1 in that row. For example, we
want to look at the neighbors of vertex 4,
we look at the row 4, then 4, the entry 4
comma 1 indicates whether or not 4 1 is an
edge. It is, so we get 1 as our vertex, then
we walk furtherÉ And then the next 1 is at
4 comma 5, so 5 is a neighbor.
And then, the next one is an 8, so 8 is a
neighbor, so in order to find the neighbors
of a vertex i, we go to the row labeled i
and we scan the row from left to right and
each 1 that we find, the corresponding column
is a neighbor.
Now, how do we find a path? Well, we can now
look at neighbors and then neighbors of neighbors
and so on. So, we start with the source vertex
in our problem, if you look at the numbering,
that we gave, New Delhi corresponded to the
vertex labeled 1 and Trivandrum with the labeled,
vertex labeled 10. And we wanted to know,
whether we can get from vertex 1 New Delhi
to vertex 10 Trivandrum.
So, what we do is, we start at vertex 1 and
we know how to find the neighbors of 1. So,
we will say that every vertex, any neighbor
of 1 can be reached from 1 by one flight.
So, we start with the vertex 1 which we have
already started, we can reach, because we
start there. Now, we scan its neighbors and
then we find that there these three neighbors,
2, 3 and 4. So, therefore now we can conclude
that if we start at 1, we can definitely reach
2, 3 and 4.
So, let us color these rows also green, so
now we have indicated that in one step from
1, we can reach 2, 3 and 4. Now, anything
that we can reach from 2, 3 and 4 can also
be reached from 1. So, we now focus one by
one to the neighbors that we have already
explored and look at their neighbors. So,
we move down to the neighbors of 2. So, 2
has only 2 neighbors, 1 and 3 and it turns
out that both 1 and 3 have already been marked
as being reachable from 1, we do nothing about
this.
So, the cities reachable from 2 do not add
any information to our problem. So, we move
on to 3, likewise 3 can reach 1 and 2, both
of which have already been listed as visited
or which can be reached from 1. So, we can
again skip over to 4, because 3 has nothing
new to tell us. Now, when we reach vertex
4, it has something new to tell us, because
now from 4, it says you can reach 1 of course,
which we know, but we can also reach 5 and
8.
So, now we will now, in our representation
we will indicate that 5 and 8 are colored
green to indicate that these are also reachable
from 1 by an indirect path, I can go from
1 to 4 and then from 4 to 5 and 8. So, I have
already processed 1, 2, 3 and 4, so the next
I look at vertex 5 to see if 5 can give us
any new neighbor. So, we look at 5 and now
5 has a neighbor we have already seen 4, but
it has a new neighbor 6 and other new neighbor
7, so if I process 5, I get 6 and 7.
Now, I can look at any of 6, 7 or 8, so let
us look at 8. So, 8 has neighbors 4, which
I have already seen, 6 which I have already
seen, but it has new neighbor 9, which I have
not seen. So, I add 9 to the list of neighbors
which can be reached eventually from 1. And
now if I look at 6, I find that 6 can reach
5, 7, 8 and 9; all of which are already known
to be neighbors or reachable from 1.
So, I do not have any new information, likewise
when I go to 7, I can reach 5 and 6, which
I already know are reachable. So, there is
no new information. And finally, the vertex
which are not yet examined is 9, so from 9
I can reach 6 which I know, 8 which I know
and there is a new vertex 10, so I can reach
10 from 9, so I mark 10 and once I marked
10, my problem is solved. I have found that
there is a way to go from 1 to 10, by systematically
expanding the set of neighbors I can reach
one level at a time.
So, this give us some algorithm, we will make
this algorithm more precise as we go long,
but you can see that using this representation
as an adjacency matrix, we can take this matrix
and use it to actually explore the problem
that we have at hand and make it into kind
of a reasonable procedure which we can execute
effectively.
So, to make this algorithm more precise, we
need to make this algorithm more systematic,
we have to keep track of the vertices which
have been visited, so that we do not keep
exploring the same vertex again. So, we do
not want to keep going around in circles and
doing the same problem again and again. So,
it will turn out that there are two fundamental
strategies to solve this particular problem
which is one of the most basic problem in
graphs, which is to find out, what is connected
to what.
So, the strategy that we executed is what
is called breadth first, that is we first
explore all the neighbors of the starting
vertex then all the neighbors of these things
which are one step away, all the neighbors
of these things that are two steps away and
so on. The other strategy is to go as far
as possible in one direction, so you pick
one neighbor at starting vertex, then you
pick one neighbor of the new vertex, then
you pick one neighbor of that new vertex and
so on until we cannot find any new vertices,
then you go back and explore another neighbor
of a previous vertex and so on and this is
called depth first. So, we will see these
algorithms in detail in a later lecture.
So, one of the thing that you can observe
is that most of the entries in this matrix
are actually 0. So, remember that if you have
n vertices, this matrixes size n square, because
I have n rows and n columns. Now, if you count
the number of the edges in an undirected graph,
then each pair of vertices can be an edge,
we normally disallows self loops, we normally
do not consider edges from i to i for vertex
i. And the number of different pairs is n
choose 2, these are how many ways you can
pick two vertices.
So, you pick all the pairs, then it is n into
n minus 1 by 2, so this is a basic combinatorial
fact. So, we could have about n square edges
no more and if you have about n square edges,
then many of these entries in this matrix
would be 1, but in most situations the number
of edges is much less than n square. So, this
is a wasteful representation in some sense,
because we are recording a lot of 0Õs in
order to capture the positive information
which is in the 1Õs.
And also remember that these 1Õs are symmetric,
so for every 1 above the line I have, so if
I draw this diagonal, for every 1 above the
diagonal, I have a symmetric 1 below the diagonal.
So, actually half of this matrix is useless,
if I just know this top half it is enough
and in this top half I will have mostly 0Õs.
So, we can think of another representation,
where we only keep the relevant information
at hand.
So, this is what is called an adjacency list,
so what we do in an adjacency list is that
we explicitly maintain for every vertex, the
list of its neighbors. So, we see that one
is connected to 2, 3 and 4. So, we say that
the list connected to the 1 is 2, 3, 4. Similarly,
2 is connected 1 and 3, so we have the list
connected to 2 is 1 and 3, so this is the
node and these are the neighbors.
So, now, in this representation, whenever
I have a node, I just go to that entry for
that node and I look up the list and I can
scan its neighbors and I can get it in time
proportional to the number of neighbors of
that node. So, there is an advantage that
I do not have any useless information, because
I am not storing all the 0Õs in the adjacency
matrix here, I am not keeping the non information
which vertices are not connected.
So, these two representation have their advantages
and disadvantages, in an adjacency matrix,
we need much more space than an adjacency
list, but some questions are easier to answer
in an adjacency matrix than in an adjacency
list. If we want to know, whether vertex j
is a neighbor of vertex i, we just have to
probe one entry in the matrix, we just check
if A i j is 1.
On the other hand in an adjacency list, if
we want to find out if j is a neighbor of
i, we need to go to the entry for i and scan
the entire list. So, this is similar to the
original discussion we had at the beginning
of the sorting module on the difference between
matrices and this. So, here we can probe this
entry A i j in unit time, whereas we need
time proportional to the number of neighbors
of i, to find out whether j is a neighbor
of i in an adjacency list.
On the other hand, if you want actually find
all the neighbors of i, then regardless of
how many neighbors are needed, in an adjacency
matrix, we have to scan the entire row. So,
there are n vertex in the graph, then even
if a node has only two or three neighbors
we will have to look at all n entries in the
row to determine which of these n entries
are the actual neighbors. On the other hand,
in an adjacency list as we have seen, we record
exactly those vertices which are neighbors.
So, time to scan the neighbors is directly
proportional to the neighbors. So, if each
vertex only a small number of neighbors, then
the adjacency list will quickly give us those
neighbors, whereas adjacency matrix will require
us to scan order n entries to find out that
small number.